<section>
  <title>Preface</title>
<!-- change title per LPP-4804, IORIO 16 oct 2007 -->
  <para>OpenLaszlo applications are written in the LZX language and compiled to any of several runtime targets. This 
Guide explains how to make those applications available to users on the Web. The <ulink url="../developers/">OpenLaszlo Application Developer's Guide</ulink> explains how to construct and test applications before you deploy them for general use.</para>

<para/><section><title>Audience and rationale for this book</title>

<para>This book is written for system administrators and others who are responsible for putting OpenLaszlo applications on the web.
</para>



<para>
  As explained in <xref linkend="architecture" />, there are two distinct ways to deploy applications:</para>
<itemizedlist spacing="compact"><listitem><para>Using the OpenLaszlo Server (formerly called LPS) to mediate the connection between the client browser and any back-end services on the web.
In this model you make available files having an .lzx or .lzo extension, which the server compiles to swf as necessary.</para></listitem><listitem><para>SOLO files, <emphasis role="i">unproxied</emphasis>. In this model the developer simply precomiles LZX files, and deployment is trivial.</para></listitem></itemizedlist>
<para>
This <emphasis role="i">Guide</emphasis> is virtually all concerned with proxied deployment. If you're deploying your OpenLaszlo application as .swf 
files you probably will not need to consult this manual.</para>



<para/></section><section><title>Typographic Conventions</title>
<para>Code is displayed like this: <literal>var a = f(2)</literal>.  Longer sections of code and other verbatim information is displayed in a separate paragraph:</para>

<programlisting>
An example file
that spans several
lines
</programlisting>

<para>Example programs are shown like this:</para>
<informalexample role="live-example"><programlisting>&lt;canvas height="20"&gt;
  &lt;text&gt;Hello World!&lt;/text&gt;
&lt;/canvas&gt;</programlisting></informalexample>

<para>Some example programs are run within the page.  The running
application is shown first, followed by the application source code,
followed by an Edit button that allows you to try out the effect of
making changes to the application source code.</para>
<example role="live-example">
 <programlisting language="lzx">
  <textobject><textdata fileref="programs/deploy-preface-$2.lzx"/></textobject>
 </programlisting>
</example>


<para/></section><section><title>Related documentation</title>

  
  
<!-- change title per LPP-2637, IORIO 19 oct 2007 -->
<para>In addition to this <emphasis role="em">OpenLaszlo System Administrator's Guide</emphasis>, please see also</para>
<itemizedlist spacing="compact"><listitem>
<!-- change title per LPP-4804, IORIO 16 oct 2007 -->
  <para>The OpenLazslo architecture combines the power and usability of client/server design with the administrative advantages and cost effectiveness of web applications. See <xref linkend="architecture"></xref> for a complete description</para>
<para>The <ulink url="../developers"><emphasis role="em">OpenLaszlo Application Developer's Guide</emphasis></ulink>, the comprehensive 
  explanation of how to write and test OpenLaszlo programs.</para></listitem><listitem><para>The <ulink url="../reference/"><emphasis role="em">LZX Reference
  Manual</emphasis></ulink>. This online, hyperlinked, comprehensive reference
  for LZX contains entries for each LZX tag and API. Its format will
  be familiar to users of JavaDoc(tm) and similar systems. </para></listitem><listitem><para>The <ulink url="../developers/" >online tutorials</ulink> and sample
  applications at <ulink url="http://www.laszlosystems.com/demos">http://www.laszlosystems.com/demos</ulink>
  provide a hands-on instructional overview of the LZX language.</para></listitem></itemizedlist>

<para/><section><title>Use the Forums</title>
<!-- change link to forums per LPP-2637, IORIO 19 oct 2007 -->
<para>The best way to learn any programming language is to draw upon the
experience and goodwill of its development community (and to write
code! as the saying goes, nobody learned to ride a bicycle by reading
about it). The LZX developer community has a home at <ulink url="http://www.laszlosystems.com/developers/community/forums/">http://www.laszlosystems.com/developers/community/forums/</ulink>. There
you will find an active discussion of all aspects of the language, and
a place to ask questions of your own.</para>

<para/></section></section></section>