<chapter id="logging">

<title>Logging</title>
 
<para>This chapter describes how to monitor and configure LPS logging as well
as how to log events from your LZX application.  Some of the same
details are covered in <xref linkend="deployers-guide"/>.</para>

<para>Conventions used in this chapter:</para>
<itemizedlist spacing="compact"><listitem><para>When file or directory path names are provided, unless otherwise
    noted, we use the Unix convention for the separator character — the
    forward slash ("<literal>/</literal>").  To translate the documentation for use on Windows
    systems, simply replace every instance of "<literal>/</literal>" with "<literal>\</literal>".
    </para></listitem><listitem><para>Environment variables are referred to via their Unix convention, e.g., <literal>$<varname>VARNAME</varname></literal>.
    To translate the documentation for use on Windows systems, the variable
    is <literal>%<varname>VARNAME</varname>%</literal>.
    </para></listitem></itemizedlist>

<para/><section><title>Overview</title>
<para>The LPS provides a highly configurable and efficient logging mechanism that you can
use to debug and monitor server activities.  The LPS relies on the well-known
<ulink url="http://logging.apache.org/log4j/docs/">Log4j </ulink> package and
this chapter touches on only a handful of the Log4j details you may need or want to know.
Before we go on to discuss the LPS log in some detail, we will first briefly
go over the logging details provided by the servlet container. 
<xref linkend="deployers.architecture"/> explains what a container is and how LPS fits 
inside it.
</para>

<para/></section><section id="logging.container-log"><title>Servlet container logging</title>
<para>The servlet container itself maintains logs of its activities that may be of interest
for debugging or monitoring Laszlo applications.  These
include:</para>
<itemizedlist spacing="compact"><listitem><para>web application lifecycle events (and errors), </para></listitem><listitem><para>request/response details, </para></listitem><listitem><para>individual web-application logs, and,</para></listitem><listitem><para>other container-specific details.  </para></listitem></itemizedlist>

 

<para>
The Jakarta Tomcat 5.0 container, by default, keeps its logs 
in <literal>$TOMCAT_HOME/logs</literal>.   Depending on how tomcat was started, it may also display some of its
logs in a console or terminal window as well.
See the <ulink url="http://tomcat.apache.org/">Tomcat web site</ulink> 
for more information.  
In general, see the documentation on your container for details on how to locate and configure these logs.
</para>

<para role="fixme"><remark role="fixme"><emphasis role="para-label">FIXME: </emphasis>Update the above to the Tomcat 5.0 location.</remark></para>

<para>
Servlet containers do provide a mechanism for the LPS to write
directly into the container logs.  In general though, the LPS does <emphasis role="i">not</emphasis> use this mechanism
except at initialization time.  When the LPS starts up, it logs a short list of initialization details
to the container's log.  In particular, it logs a message that describes where to find the 
detailed LPS log, that contains the remainder of the LPS log messages.  
</para>
<para> When the LPS is started successfully, you will see information such as the following in 
the container's log.  
</para>

<programlisting>
2004-04-20 15:58:23 LPS: LPS_HOME is c:\Program Files\Laszlo Presentation Server 2.2\Server\lps-2.2
2004-04-20 15:58:23 LPS: LPS config directory is: c:\Program Files\Laszlo Presentation Server 2.2\Server\lps-2.2\WEB-INF\lps\config
2004-04-20 15:58:24 LPS: Detailed LPS log is at C:/Program Files/Laszlo Presentation Server 2.2/Server/lps-2.2/WEB-INF/lps/work/logs/lps.log
2004-04-20 15:58:24 LPS: LPS log configured with c:\Program Files\Laszlo Presentation Server 2.2\lps-2.2\WEB-INF\lps\config\lps.xml
</programlisting>

<para/></section><section><title>Java IO streams</title>
<para>
Since ultimately a Java servlet container is just a Java process, it 
has standard IO streams, <literal>stdout</literal> and <literal>stderr</literal>, associated
with it.  Some containers may provide configuration for the location
of the files that these streams are written to.  In general, the LPS does not use these streams 
for logging.  Your container may or may not use these streams.   Other server code in your 
web application may use these streams.   We mention them briefly here
as they can be helpful in debugging configuration or installation problems.
</para>

<para role="fixme"><remark role="fixme"><emphasis role="para-label">FIXME: </emphasis>Not sure the following section belongs here. It could be useful in the install docs.</remark></para>

<para>
If you have set certain Java debugging options, you may find
debug information in the <literal>stderr</literal> stream.  For example, if you are debugging
Java <literal>$CLASSPATH</literal> and class loading issues, you may use <literal>JAVA_OPTS="-verbose:class"</literal>
and you will want to locate the Java <literal>stderr</literal> stream for the verbose output.
Jakarta Tomcat will often store these files its <literal>$TOMCAT_HOME/logs</literal> directory.
(If you are on Windows and running Tomcat as an NT service, the location of these files
will depend on how the NT service was created; these files 
are in <literal>C:\WINDOWS\system32\stderr.log</literal> and <literal>C:\WINDOWS\system32\stdout.log</literal>).
</para>


<para/></section><section><title>LPS logging</title>
<para>
The LPS log (referred to <link linkend="logging.container-log">above</link> as the detailed
LPS log) contains both request/response details as well as 
debugging information.</para>

<para>
The default location for the LPS log file is inside the web applications WEB-INF directory at
<literal>$LPS_HOME/WEB-INF/lps/work/logs/lps.log</literal>.
</para>

<para>
For some deployments,  you may want to configure the log location
to be something other than the default.  The LPS Log4j configuration
is read from <literal>$LPS_HOME/WEB-INF/lps/config/lps.xml</literal>.
If <literal>$LPS_HOME/WEB-INF/lps/config/log4j.xml</literal> settings are
read from this file instead.
</para>

<para>The LPS ships with its logger configured at the <literal>INFO</literal> level.  You may
wish to change this to <literal>WARN</literal> or <literal>ERROR</literal> to see fewer details, or to <literal>DEBUG</literal>
to see more details.  You can do this by changing the <literal>priority</literal>
attribute of the <literal>org.openlaszlo</literal> logger defined in the
default lps.xml file.  Below is an example of chaning the logger to <literal>DEBUG</literal>.
The <literal>DEBUG</literal> level is extremely verbose. 
</para>

<example role="live-example"><title>Changing LPS log to DEBUG</title><programlisting>
&lt;logger name="org.openlaszlo" additivity="false"&gt;
  &lt;priority value="debug"/&gt;
  &lt;appender-ref ref="lps"/&gt;
&lt;/logger&gt;
</programlisting></example>


<para/></section><section><title>Log4j tidbits</title>
<para role="fixme"><remark role="fixme"><emphasis role="para-label">FIXME: </emphasis>Is this worth it or can we just expect them to read the log4j docs? 
most details can be 
found at <ulink url="http://logging.apache.org/log4j/docs/manual.html">Log4j docs</ulink>

<itemizedlist spacing="compact"><listitem><para>Overview</para></listitem><listitem><para>Loggers</para></listitem><listitem><para>Appenders
    <itemizedlist spacing="compact"><listitem><para>Connecting to NT Event Logger</para></listitem></itemizedlist>
    </para></listitem><listitem><para>Layouts
    <itemizedlist spacing="compact"><listitem><para>ConversionPattern details </para></listitem></itemizedlist>
    </para></listitem></itemizedlist>
</remark></para>
<para>
If your container also uses Log4j to configure its own logging, there
can be some interaction between the LPS logs and the container logs.
<remark role="fixme">Remove this parag. or fill in how this works; the value of the appender's <literal>additivity</literal>
attribute may cause log statements to show up in multiple logs.  The precise way this works
is a bit confusing.  Also need to describe log4j stuff before going into this so maybe move down lower?.</remark>
</para>

<para/><section><title>Interactions between container and LPS logging</title>
<para>
If your container happens to also use Log4j as its logging mechanism (Tomcat 5.0 does), then 
you may see interactions between the container and LPS logging depending on how the Log4j appenders
are configured for the LPS.
</para>
<para/></section></section>
  <section><title>Logging from within LZX</title>

<para>
You can log events from your application to the server quite simply.   There are
three steps.</para>

<itemizedlist spacing="compact"><listitem><para>Modify the log4j configuration</para></listitem><listitem><para>Create a logger jsp</para></listitem><listitem><para>Send messages to the logger from your LZX code</para></listitem></itemizedlist>

<para>You may want to log directly into the LPS log file.  Or you may want to
log into a separate file.  You can set up the Log4j configuration to best suit
your needs.  And the configuration can be changed after the application has been developed.
</para>
<para>
Log4j appenders can be used to control where log statements are emitted.  The example below creates a 
new logger called <literal>mylogger</literal> that will append log statements to the <literal>C:\mylog.txt</literal> file.  
(If you wanted your applications log statements to go directly into the LPS log file, you would configure
your logger to use the <literal>lps</literal> appender that is already declared.)
</para>
<example role="live-example"><title>Log4j configuration: creating your own logger</title><programlisting>
&lt;log4j:configuration xmlns:log4j="http://jakarta.apache.org/log4j"&gt;

  &lt;appender name="myappender" class="org.apache.log4j.RollingFileAppender"&gt;
    &lt;layout class="org.apache.log4j.PatternLayout"&gt;
      &lt;param name="ConversionPattern" 
             value="%d{dd MMM yyyy HH:mm:ss} %-5p - %m%n"/&gt;
    &lt;/layout&gt;	    
    &lt;param name="File" value="c:\mylog.txt"/&gt;
  &lt;/appender&gt;

  &lt;appender name="lps" class="org.apache.log4j.RollingFileAppender"&gt;
    &lt;!-- ==================================================== --&gt;
    &lt;!-- By default, the LPS sets the log file in the servlet --&gt;
    &lt;!-- container's temporary directory. See servlet context --&gt;
    &lt;!-- log for the exact location.                          --&gt;
    &lt;!-- If you wish to place that file somewhere else, like  --&gt;
    &lt;!-- /var/adm/logs, then uncomment the line below.        --&gt;
    &lt;!-- ==================================================== --&gt;
    &lt;!--
    &lt;param name="File" value="/var/adm/logs/lps.log"/&gt;
    --&gt;

    &lt;!--
    &lt;param name="MaxFileSize" value="10MB"/&gt;
    --&gt;
    &lt;param name="MaxBackupIndex" value="10"/&gt;

    &lt;layout class="org.apache.log4j.PatternLayout"&gt;
        &lt;param name="ConversionPattern" 
               value="%d{dd MMM yyyy HH:mm:ss} (%x) %-5p %-20c{2} - %m%n"/&gt;
    &lt;/layout&gt;	    
  &lt;/appender&gt;

  &lt;logger name="mylogger" additivity="false"&gt;
    &lt;priority value="debug"/&gt;
    &lt;appender-ref ref="myappender"/&gt;
  &lt;/logger&gt;

  &lt;logger name="org.openlaszlo" additivity="false"&gt;
    &lt;priority value="info"/&gt;
    &lt;appender-ref ref="lps"/&gt;
  &lt;/logger&gt;
&lt;/log4j:configuration&gt;
</programlisting></example>

<para>
The following is a simple JSP that can be used to talk to a Log4j logger of a given 
name and emit error, warn, info, or debug messages.
</para>

<example role="live-example"><title>Simple JSP logger</title><programlisting>
&lt;%@ page import="java.util.*" %&gt;
&lt;%@ page import="java.io.*" %&gt;
&lt;%@ page import="org.apache.log4j.*" %&gt;
&lt;%
  response.setContentType("text/xml");
  response.setHeader("Expires", "Fri, 05 Oct 2001 00:00:00 GMT");

  String loggerName = request.getParameter("logger");
  Logger logger = Logger.getLogger(loggerName);
  String msg = request.getParameter("msg");
  String t = request.getParameter("type");

  if (t.equalsIgnoreCase("debug")) {
    logger.debug(msg);
  } else if (t.equalsIgnoreCase("info")) {
    logger.info(msg);
  } else if (t.equalsIgnoreCase("error")) {
    logger.error(msg);
  } else if (t.equalsIgnoreCase("warn")) {
    logger.warn(msg);
  } else {
    throw new Exception("unknown log type");
  }
%&gt;
&lt;status&gt;ok&lt;/status&gt;
</programlisting></example>
<warning><para>
If you deploy something like the JSP above, you will likely want the JSP to require some authentication.
<remark role="fixme">This is left as an exercise for the reader :-).  There should be a link to the authentication
section in the data chapter. (jrs: what section is that??)</remark>
</para></warning>

<para>
The following is a simple Laszlo application that can be used with the above JSP and log configuration
to emit messages to the <literal>C:\mylog.txt</literal> file.
</para>

<example role="live-example"><title>Log from LZX to the server</title><programlisting>
&lt;canvas&gt;
  &lt;dataset name="ds" src="http:logger.jsp"/&gt;
  &lt;form layout="axis: y" id="f"&gt;
    &lt;edittext id="logger" width="200"&gt;mylogger&lt;/edittext&gt;
    &lt;edittext id="msg"    width="300"&gt;Your message here &lt;/edittext&gt;
    
    &lt;radiogroup id="t"&gt;
      &lt;radiobutton&gt;debug&lt;/radiobutton&gt; 
      &lt;radiobutton&gt;warn&lt;/radiobutton&gt; 
      &lt;radiobutton&gt;error&lt;/radiobutton&gt; 
      &lt;radiobutton&gt;info&lt;/radiobutton&gt; 
    &lt;/radiogroup&gt; 
    &lt;button isdefault="true"&gt;Log message to server
      &lt;handler name="onclick"&gt;
        ds.setQueryParams({logger:logger.text, msg: msg.text, type:t.value}); 
          ds.doRequest();
      &lt;/handler&gt;
    &lt;/button&gt;
  &lt;/form&gt;
&lt;/canvas&gt;
</programlisting></example>

<para/></section><section><title>Caveats</title>
<itemizedlist spacing="compact"><listitem><para>The precise format of the LPS log may change from release to release.</para></listitem></itemizedlist>

<para/></section></chapter>