<chapter id="comp-overview">


 <title>Getting More from Components</title>
 <!-- remove commented out sample code that was ignored by the build. IORIO 20 nov 2007 -->
 <para>OpenLaszlo components are high-level objects that implement common user-interface functions. </para>

 <para> Sources for LZ components are <ulink url="../../lps/components/">here.</ulink>
 </para>

 <para> Earlier chapters have shown simple usage of components. This chapter describes various more
  advanced ways to use components, and contains summary descriptions of how to extend components and
  create new ones. (These topics are covered in greater depth in later chapters.) </para>


 <section>
  <title>Customizing components</title>
  <para> All components have several attributes, such as background color and text color, to which
   you can assign different values to change the component's appearance. You can set individual
   values for a single component, and you can also set a "style" for a group. </para>

  <section>
   <title>Using the &lt;style&gt; tag</title>
   <para> There are several styles defined as classes (whitestyle, silverstyle, bluestyle,
    greenstyle, goldstyle, and purplestyle). You may create an instance of one of these, create a
    new style, or create an instance with one or more modified attributes. </para>
   <para> Different styles may be used in different parts of an application, to highlight a single
    component or to distinguish a group of components. The style of a component applies to itself
    and any component within it. </para>
   <para> Styles may be defined to establish a consistent "look" for a group of components. There
    are a number of pre-defined styles. If you don't declare a default style, the OpenLaszlo
    components use whitestyle. To specify a different default style, define a style with
    isdefault="true". </para>
   <para> In the example below, section one and two of the tabslider and the checkboxes inside them
    appear gold. Section Three and the components inside it appear green. </para>
   <example role="live-example">
    <title>The &lt;style&gt; tag</title>
    <programlisting language="lzx">
   <textobject><textdata fileref="programs/comp-overview-$1.lzx"/></textobject> 
   </programlisting>
   </example>

   <para> </para>

  </section>
 </section>
 <section>
  <title>Data-backed versus instance components</title>
  <para> Many components, such as lists and combination, or "combo" boxes, are driven by data that
   is in XML format. For some components, you supply the data to the component "inline", that is,
   within the actual tag that defines an instance. For others, data comes from an associated
   dataset. </para>
  <para> To see how these compare, inspect the reference pages for <indexterm>
    <primary>combobox</primary>
   </indexterm><sgmltag class="element">&lt;combobox&gt;</sgmltag><remark role="fixme"
    >[unknown tag]</remark>
   <!--unknown tag: combobox--> and <indexterm>
    <primary>datacombobox</primary>
   </indexterm><sgmltag class="element">&lt;datacombobox&gt;</sgmltag><remark role="fixme"
    >[unknown tag]</remark>
   <!--unknown tag: datacombobox--> . The choice of which to use depends on personal preference and
   the nature of the problem you're trying to solve. Data-backed components such as <indexterm>
    <primary>datacombobox</primary>
   </indexterm><sgmltag class="element">&lt;datacombobox&gt;</sgmltag> provide a nice
   separation between data and presentation and make it easier to consume data from external
   sources. Instance components like <indexterm>
    <primary>combobox</primary>
   </indexterm><sgmltag class="element">&lt;combobox&gt;</sgmltag> are conceptually simpler
   and often more convenient and easier to understand. </para>

 </section>
 <section>
  <title>Building your own components</title>
  <para> As you design more powerful applications you may find that the existing components do not
   meet your needs. In that situation you can build your own custom components. Designing your own
   components is a subject beyond the scope of this chapter, but here is a brief description of
   what's involved. </para>
  <para>Implementing new components has two general aspects: </para>
  <itemizedlist spacing="compact">
   <listitem>
    <para>devising the component's behavior</para>
   </listitem>
   <listitem>
    <para>devising its visual appearance.</para>
   </listitem>
  </itemizedlist>
  <section>
   <title>Implementing behavior</title>

   <para> To learn how to do this, first make sure that you understand classes and how to extend
    them, as explained in <xref linkend="introductory-classes"/> and <xref
     linkend="class-inheritance"/>. Then read <xref linkend="custom-components"/>. </para>

  </section>
  <section>
   <title>Implementing appearance</title>
   <para> Designing the visual appearance of a new component requires a designer's eye and
    meticulous attention to detail—at the level of placement of individual pixels. </para>
   <para> The role of the graphic designer on Laszlo projects is explained in <xref
     linkend="designers"/>. In addition, we recommend that you study the construction of the LZ
    components, as explained in <xref linkend="custom-components"/>. </para>


  </section>
  <section>
   <title>Example: Extending the &lt;alert&gt; component</title>
   <para> As explained above, sometimes you can create your own new component by subclassing, or
     <glossterm>extending</glossterm> an existing component. Here the <indexterm>
     <primary>alert</primary>
    </indexterm><sgmltag class="element">&lt;alert&gt;</sgmltag><remark role="fixme"
     >[unknown tag]</remark>
    <!--unknown tag: alert--> class is extended to create a new component called "myalert". It is
    trivially different from the default <indexterm>
     <primary>alert</primary>
    </indexterm><sgmltag class="element">&lt;alert&gt;</sgmltag>; its only difference is
    that it centers nicely over the survey box. </para>
   <example role="live-example">
    <title>extending a component</title>
    <programlisting>
    &lt;class extends="alert" name="myalert" x="${Math.max(survey.width - this.width, 0)/2}" y="${Math.max(survey.height - this.height, 0)/3}"&gt;
    &lt;/class&gt;
</programlisting>
   </example>


  </section>
 </section>
</chapter>
