<section>
<!-- added title  to validate against DocBook LI, LPP-4595 9/3/2007-->
<title>Preface</title>
<para>We invented this technology to make it possible to create web
applications that are delightful to use.</para>

<para>Every computer user knows the power of the Internet, and every web
surfer has been awed at one time or another by the vast wealth of the
Web. But at the same time everyone knows, even if they only know it
subconsciously, that web-based applications running in a browser offer
a user experience that is inherently inferior to that of
locally-running programs. There is something almost retrograde about
interacting with websites; they're anomalous, like rotary telephones
in a touch-tone world.</para>

<para>The reason for this is clear. It's not because web designers don't
know anything about usability or visual design or software
engineering. It's because they have not had the tools they require to
build the web experience they conceive.</para>

<para>HTML is a great thing; DHTML is a great thing. Adobe's
Flash<trademark/> is a great thing. But none of them allow
developers to create astounding user experiences, because all of them
are based on fundamentally limited models. The variants of HTML are
based on the metaphor of a "page," which forces users to
process information in arbitrary discrete chunks separated by jarring
transitions and "page refreshes." Flash offers the
possibility of a much more continuous user experience, but its
"movie" metaphor forces developers to leave behind many
essential tools and techniques of modern software development.</para>

<para>In contrast, the OpenLaszlo solution was built from the ground up for
application development — not "page" development, not
"movie" development — and is centered around standard
development approaches. LZX applications are written in XML files with
embedded JavaScript, which provide an ideal foundation for serious developers. OpenLaszlo supports standards-based object-oriented
development and data binding, and enables rich interactivity without
requiring complex, timeline-based visual authoring.</para>

<para>The result is applications that are delightful to use. Now,
delightfulness is in the eye of the beholder, of course, and that's
why we suggest that you right now click on  our <ulink url="../../demos/amazon/amazon.lzx">e-commerce</ulink>
application.
 This program communicates with
Amazon.com's data servers and allows you to browse their products,
create a wish list, fill a shopping cart, and so forth. So in many
ways it's just like any other similar e-commerce site. But notice that
there are no screen refreshes, and that you can move items by dragging
them with the mouse, that it's hard to get "lost." Now
consider that this program was written in a few hours using a simple
text editor.</para>

<para>We suggest that you play around with any of the dozens of other
sample applications <ulink url="../../demos/">here</ulink> or on the Laszlo Systems <ulink url="http://www.laszlosystems.com/demos/">website</ulink>   to get a feel for
what a Laszlo application is like. One sometimes hears the phrase
"Rich Internet Application" to describe programs like these,
and their defining characteristic is that they make people smile. A
growing body of empirical studies <remark role="todo">source</remark> shows that when
people have a more pleasant experience on a website, the longer they
stay there, and on commercial sites, the more commerce they
transact.</para>

<para/><section><title>Audience and rationale for this book</title>

<para>This book is written for software developers who have familiarity
with the concepts of object-oriented programming as implemented in
languages such as Java, C++, or JavaScript, and with the fundamentals
of XML data formats.</para>
<!-- fix broken links per LPP-4897, IORIO 15 oct 2007 -->
<para>We also hope that this guide will be accessible to web
developers who know HTML and CSS but haven't yet worked with object
oriented languages, and to developers and designers familiar with
Flash or FlashMX. If this describes you, you may have a little
homework to do outside the scope of this book, but in general you
should have no trouble becoming a fluent LZX developer. A good place
for you to start learning would be with the <ulink url="../developers/" type="laszlo-dguide">tutorials</ulink>.</para>

<para/></section><section><title>On Runtimes and Deployment Modes and the "Core" API</title>
<para>
OpenLaszlo applications can be compiled to run in any of several runtimes, and in either of two deployment modes. Some capabilities are available in only a subset of these use cases. OpenLaszlo's "core" APIs run on all target runtimes, and they get the most attention in this <emphasis role="i">Guide</emphasis>. The "Core API" is kind of loose concept, since there's no formal definition, but what it means is that unless you see indication to the contrary, you can assume that the topic under discussion applies to all runtimes. Similarly the default deployment mode is assumed to be SOLO.
</para>
<para>
Nevertheless, as a developer you have to decide whether to:
</para>
<orderedlist spacing="compact"><listitem><para>optimize for swf (employ swf-only APIs, (and maybe even touch Flash APIs))</para></listitem><listitem><para>optimize for dhtml (employ dhtml-only APIs)</para></listitem><listitem><para>code to lowest common denominator ("core" APIs only)</para></listitem><listitem><para>conditionalize (include both. An example would be including comma separated list of embedded and system fonts; when compiled to swf you get embedded font, to dhtml you get system font).</para></listitem></orderedlist>
<!-- change title per LPP-4804, IORIO 16 oct 2007 -->
<para>
The focus of the <emphasis role="i">OpenLaszlo Application Developer's Guide</emphasis> is (3), the lowest common denominator; runtime-specific APIs and engineering approaches are presented as adjuncts.  Graphic devices ("glyphs") in the margin call attention to non core/non SOLO information.
</para>
<para role="fixme"><remark role="fixme"><emphasis role="para-label">FIXME: </emphasis>illustrate the glyphs here when they're ready</remark></para>
<para>
Depending on which approach you're taking, you'll make different engineering decisions and different approaches to reading the this <emphasis role="i">Guide</emphasis>.  For example, if you're determined to deploy SOLO, you can just skip all the chapters marked with the "Server Required" device, etc.
</para>
<para>
Finally, this <emphasis role="i">Guide</emphasis> does not address any browser-specific considerations.  If a thing does not run on all supported browsers for a given runtime, it's by definition not supported and thus should not be cluttering up our lovely <emphasis role="i">Guide</emphasis>. Nonstandard, browser-specific things are described in the release notes or the <ulink url="http://wiki.openlaszlo.org/Main_Page">OpenLaszo Wiki</ulink>.
</para>
<para/><section><title>Learn by Doing</title>
<para>This Guide contains hundreds of "live" examples, that is, 
Laszlo Applications that are embedded in this page. You'll have more fun and get more out of this document if you "play with the code." To do so,
simply click on the "Edit" link at the bottom left corner of each example. This will cause a new window to pop up that is a self-contained
environment for modifying and executing Laszlo applications. Edit the sample code then click "update" and see the results displayed in the 
right-hand side of the window. To return the sample code to its initial state, click "Reset." </para>
<para>
If you would like to save a copy of the application for later use, click on the "Save As" button.
</para>



<para/></section><section><title>Sequential and Random Access</title>

<para><emphasis role="i">Designing, Developing and Deploying Laszlo Applications</emphasis> is intended for sequential and random
access. In general, each chapter draws on the concepts covered in the chapters
that precede it, but not (too much) on those in the chapters that follow it. If you start with Chapter One
and read to the end, you won't get lost.</para>  
<para>
 At the same time, each
chapter is designed to be encyclopedic: the chapter on Animation
covers the entire subject of animation, and so forth.</para>
<para> 
 Short, self-contained examples appear throughout. Links are provided to longer examples.</para>


<para/></section></section><section><title>Typographic Conventions</title>
<para>Code is displayed thus: <literal>var a = f(2)</literal>. Tags are displayed thus: <sgmltag class="element">&lt;canvas&gt;</sgmltag> and their attributes are displayed like this: 
<sgmltag class="attribute">height</sgmltag>. Function names are displayed like this: <methodname>setAttribute()</methodname>.  Longer sections of code and other verbatim information is displayed in a separate paragraph:</para>
<programlisting>
An example file
that spans several
lines
</programlisting>

<para>Example programs are shown thus:</para>
<informalexample role="live-example"><programlisting>&lt;canvas height="20"&gt;
  &lt;text&gt;Hello World!&lt;/text&gt;
&lt;/canvas&gt;</programlisting></informalexample>

<para>Some example programs are run within the page.  The running
application is shown first, followed by the application source code,
followed by an Edit button that allows you to try out the effect of
making changes to the application source code.</para>
<informalexample role="live-example">
  <programlisting language="lzx">
    <textobject><textdata fileref="programs/developers_guide_preface-$2.lzx"/></textobject>
  </programlisting>
</informalexample>

<para role="todo"><remark role="todo"><emphasis role="para-label">TODO: </emphasis>Material marked thus is only shown in the beta distributions of
the documentation, and must be eliminated before the product is
final.</remark></para>

<para role="fixme"><remark role="fixme"><emphasis role="para-label">FIXME: </emphasis>Material in <sgmltag>fixme</sgmltag> is only shown
internally, and should not be present in beta or final
distributions.</remark></para>

<para/></section><section><title>Related documentation</title>

  
  
<!-- change title per LPP-4804, IORIO 16 oct 2007 -->
<para>In addition to this <emphasis role="em">OpenLaszlo Application Developer's Guide</emphasis>, please see also</para>
<itemizedlist spacing="compact"><listitem><para>The <ulink url="../reference/../reference/" type="laszlo-reference"><emphasis role="em">LZX Reference
  Manual</emphasis></ulink>. This online, hyperlinked, comprehensive reference
  for LZX contains entries for each LZX tag and API. Its format will
  be familiar to users of JavaDoc(tm) and similar systems. </para></listitem>
  <!-- fix broken link per LPP-4897, IORIO 15 oct 2007 -->
  <listitem><para>The <ulink url="../developers/" type="laszlo-dguide">online tutorials</ulink> and sample
  applications at <ulink url="http://www.laszlosystems.com/demos">http://www.laszlosystems.com/demos</ulink>
  provide a hands-on instructional overview of the LZX language.</para></listitem></itemizedlist>

<para/></section><section><title>Suggested reading paths</title>
<para role="todo"><remark role="todo"><emphasis role="para-label">TODO: </emphasis>
This section, ideally, may be replaced with an interactive (lzx) map.
</remark></para>

<para>The best way to use the <emphasis role="em">LZX Developer's Guide</emphasis> depends on
your experience.</para>

<para><emphasis role="em">Experienced Object-Oriented programmers</emphasis>: We suggest that
you start by reading Chapters 1, 2 and 4 of this Guide. If you have
never worked with JavaScript, you can learn the basics quickly at one
of the JavaScript tutorials at <ulink url="http://www.w3schools.com/js/default.asp">W3Schools</ulink>, <ulink url="http://www.wdvl.com/Authoring/JavaScript/Tutorial/">WVDL</ulink>, or
<ulink url="http://www.pageresource.com/jscript/">PageResource.com</ulink>. Then visit
the <ulink url="http://www.openlaszlo.org">OpenLaszlo</ulink> website and play around with the tutorials and sample programs; as you read the sample code be sure to
look up appropriate entries in the <emphasis role="em">Reference Manual.</emphasis> At that
point you'll know what further reading you need to do in this
guide.</para>
<!-- fix broken link per LPP-4897, IORIO 15 oct 2007 -->
<para><emphasis role="em">Web/Flash developers with no Object-Oriented experience:</emphasis>
We suggest that you start with the <ulink url="../developers/" type="laszlo-dguide">tutorials</ulink> in order to get a general feel for
LZX programming. Don't worry about mastering the subjects they cover;
your goal is to begin to get comfortable with the language.</para>

<para>If you need to, learn the basics of 
<ulink url="http://www.w3.org/XML/">XML</ulink>.</para>
<!-- fix broken link per LPP-4897, IORIO 15 oct 2007 -->
<para>Then read the rest of <xref linkend="program-development"/>.</para>

<para role="todo"><remark role="todo"><emphasis role="para-label">TODO: </emphasis>Work your way through a JavaScript tutorial
<remark role="todo">link</remark>. Caution: it makes sense to read the first four
chapters of this book before doing the JavaScript tutorial, because
LZX employs JavaScript in a way that is quite distinct from the way it
is used in web browsers.</remark></para>

<para role="todo"><remark role="todo"><emphasis role="para-label">TODO: </emphasis>Then read Chapters 4 through 12 of this manual, making sure that
you edit the sample programs.  After you've done that you'll be
an experienced Object Oriented programmer and able to decide for
yourself how best to proceed from there.</remark></para>

<para/><section><title>Use the Forums</title>

<para>The best way to learn any programming language is to draw upon the
experience and goodwill of its development community (and to write
code! as the saying goes, nobody learned to ride a bicycle by reading
about it). The LZX developer community has a home at <ulink url="http://www.laszlosystems.com/developers/community/forums/">http://www.laszlosystems.com/developers/community/forums/</ulink>. There
you will find an active discussion of all aspects of the language, and
a place to ask questions of your own.</para>

<para/></section></section></section>