<chapter id="rpc-javarpc">

<title>JavaRPC</title>
<!-- remove commented out sample code that was ignored by the build. IORIO 20 nov 2007 -->
<!-- add titleabbrev to use as target text per LPP-4923, IORIO 17 oct 2007 -->
<titleabbrev id="rpc-javashort">JavaRPC</titleabbrev>
<para>JavaRPC is a feature that allows server-side Java objects and methods to be
accessed from a client application. The &lt;javarpc&gt; element is used to
declare a JavaRPC object in LZX. JavaRPC is part of the OpenLaszlo RPC family and
shares similar APIs with SOAP and XML-RPC. See the RPC chapter for details.</para>




<para/><section><title condition="proxied">&lt;javarpc&gt;</title>

<para>Declare a javarpc element to create a JavaRPC object in LZX. The remoteclassname
attribute specifies what class javarpc represents. To use a class, place it in
WEB-INF/classes or, if it exists in a jar, in WEB-INF lib. This will ensure that
the class is accessible to the OpenLaszlo Server.</para>

<informalexample role="live-example"><programlisting>
&lt;javarpc remoteclassname="..."
     attributename="..."
     scope="[session|webapp|none]"
     loadoption="[loadcreate|loadonly|create]"
     createargs="..."
     objectreturntype="[pojo|javabean]"
     autoload="[true|false]"
     secure="[true|false]"
     secureport="..."&gt;
</programlisting></informalexample>

<para/></section><section><title>Attributes</title>

<para><indexterm significance="preferred"><primary>remoteclassname</primary></indexterm><glossterm>remoteclassname</glossterm>: (String) the remote java class to instantiate in the
server, or if scope is 'none', the static stub to return to the client
associated to the remoteclassname. <emphasis role="b">This is a required attribute.</emphasis></para>

<para><indexterm significance="preferred"><primary>attributename</primary></indexterm><glossterm>attributename</glossterm>: (String) the key to use for the server-side object
(see scope attribute). Attributename (or name) is required if scope is 'session'
or 'webapp'. <emphasis role="b">Defaults to the name attribute of this object.</emphasis></para>

<para><indexterm significance="preferred"><primary>scope</primary></indexterm><glossterm>scope</glossterm>: (String) one of 'session', 'webapp', or 'none'. Session
scope means that the server object will be saved in a session attribute (see
javax.servlet.http.HttpSession). If scope is webapp, the server object is saved
in a web application context (see javax.servlet.ServletContext). For session and
webapp scopes, client-side remote methods will always invoke the same saved
server objects. The objects are saved in a java.util.Map that is placed in an
attribute called "__lzobj". The map key for the object is the
<literal>attributename</literal> of the client-side javarpc object. If scope is none, no
object is saved in the server and only public static methods are defined in the
client-side javarpc object. <emphasis role="b">This is a required attribute.</emphasis></para>

<para><indexterm significance="preferred"><primary>loadoption</primary></indexterm><glossterm>loadoption</glossterm>: (String) one of 'loadcreate', 'loadonly', or
'create'. Loadcreate tries to load javarpc object if it exists in the server,
else it creates it before loading. 'Loadonly' will only load object if it
exists, else an error is returned. 'Create' will always create the object in the
server. <emphasis role="b">Default is 'loadcreate'.</emphasis></para>

<para><indexterm significance="preferred"><primary>createargs</primary></indexterm><glossterm>createargs</glossterm>: (Array) valid only when loadoption='loadcreate' or
loadoption='create'. The array consists of parameters to construct server-side
object, for example [1, 'mystring', 1.45] would instantiate an object using a
constructor that takes an integer, a string, and a double. <emphasis role="b">Default is
null.</emphasis></para>

<para><indexterm significance="preferred"><primary>objectreturntype</primary></indexterm><glossterm>objectreturntype</glossterm>: (String) one of 'pojo' or 'javabean'. If an
object is returned from the server, 'pojo' will return only the public member
values of that object and 'javabean' will return member values for members that
have corresponding getters. See <emphasis role="b">examples/javarpc/returnpojo.lzx</emphasis> and
<emphasis role="b">examples/javarpc/returnjavabean.lzx</emphasis> for usage example.</para>

<para><indexterm significance="preferred"><primary>autoload</primary></indexterm><glossterm>autoload</glossterm>: (Boolean) if true, calls to load client proxy during
init stage. If false, the proxy must be loaded using the load() method.
<emphasis role="b">Default is true.</emphasis></para>

<para><indexterm significance="preferred"><primary>secure</primary></indexterm><glossterm>secure</glossterm>: (Boolean) if true, creates a secure HTTPS connection
between the client and OpenLaszlo Server. Also see secureport below. <emphasis role="b">Default is
false.</emphasis></para>

<para><indexterm significance="preferred"><primary>secureport</primary></indexterm><glossterm>secureport</glossterm>: (Number) valid only when secure attribute is set to
true. The secure port to use. There is no client-side default. Most servers use
port 443 as the default HTTPS port.</para>

<para/><section><title>Read-only properties</title>

<para><indexterm significance="preferred"><primary>proxy</primary></indexterm><glossterm>proxy</glossterm>: (Object) this is the object containing function stubs. It
is created by calling load() (which happens during init if autoload is true). If
scope is session or webapp, proxy contains all public methods described in the
server class (see remoteclassname attribute). If scope is none, proxy contains all
public static methods described in the server class. Note that proxy is not
defined until the onload event is sent, thus function stubs cannot be invoked
until onload. Each function stub requires two arguments: an array of parameters
and delegate. You can unload the proxy (i.e., set to null) by calling the
unload() method. Calling unload will also remove the server-side object if scope
is session or webapp. See the proxy section in the RPC chapter for details.</para>



<para/></section></section><section><title>Events</title>

<para>Note: event handler methods must be declared in the body of
&lt;javarpc&gt;. Attribute event handlers will not work.</para>

<para><indexterm significance="preferred"><primary>onload</primary></indexterm><glossterm>onload</glossterm>: this event is triggered when the proxy is returned to the
client.</para>

<para><indexterm significance="preferred"><primary>onunload</primary></indexterm><glossterm>onunload</glossterm>: this event is triggered when the proxy is unloaded from
the client.</para>

<para><indexterm significance="preferred"><primary>ondata</primary></indexterm><glossterm>ondata</glossterm>: this event is triggered when a declared &lt;remotecall&gt;
doesn't handle its ondata events. See the &lt;remotecall&gt; section for
details.</para>

<para><indexterm significance="preferred"><primary>onerror</primary></indexterm><glossterm>onerror</glossterm>: this event is triggered if there was a problem loading or
unloading the stub, or if a declared &lt;remotecall&gt; didn't handle its
onerror event. See the &lt;remotecall&gt; section in the RPC chapter for
details.</para>



<para/></section><section><title>Methods</title>



<para/><section><title>load()</title>

<para>Load() is responsible for setting up the proxy property. When loading a
session scoped or webapp scoped object, a tuple of arguments may be passed in to
instantiate the server-side java object using the createargs attribute.
Createargs is an array of values and must match the server-side parameter
signature of the constructor. When the call returns, an onload event is sent and
the proxy will contain function stubs that mirror the public methods in the Java
class specified.</para>

<example role="live-example">
   <title>Loading an object</title>
   <programlisting language="lzx">
   <textobject><textdata fileref="programs/rpc-javarpc-$2.lzx"/></textobject> 
   </programlisting>
</example>


<para>The Java source for the previous example can be found in the
<literal>$LPS_HOME/WEB-INF/classes/examples</literal> directory. Here's what it looks
like:</para>

<informalexample role="live-example"><programlisting>
package examples;

public class ConstructExample {

    int mInt = 0;
    String mString = "";
    double mDouble = 0.0;

    public ConstructExample(int i) {
        mInt = i;
    }

    public ConstructExample(int i, String s, double d) {
        mInt = i;
        mString = s;
        mDouble = d;
    }

    public String getInfo() {
        return "int: " + mInt + "\n"
            + "string: " + mString + "\n"
            + "double: " + mDouble + "\n";
    }
}
</programlisting></informalexample>

<para>See RPC chapter for information on remotecall and other details about the
load() method.</para>



<para/></section><section><title>unload()</title>

<para>This method unloads the proxy from the RPC object and sets it to null. Also,
the associated java object is removed from the server-side map. When the call
returns, an onunload event is sent.</para>

<para><emphasis role="b">unload() implementation in javarpc.lzx</emphasis></para>

<example role="live-example">
   <title>Unloading proxy from the RPC object</title>
   <programlisting language="lzx">
   <textobject><textdata fileref="programs/rpc-javarpc-$4.lzx"/></textobject> 
   </programlisting>
</example>

<para/></section></section><section><title>Security</title>

<para>Java classes used in an application must be declared in a security
element. Classes not defined in a security element are not allowed to be
accessed or instantiated. The format of the security element looks like:</para>

<informalexample role="live-example"><programlisting>
&lt;security&gt;
    &lt;allow&gt;
        &lt;pattern&gt;CLASS1&lt;/pattern&gt;
        &lt;pattern&gt;CLASS2&lt;/pattern&gt;
        ...
        &lt;pattern&gt;CLASSN&lt;/pattern&gt;
    &lt;/allow&gt;
&lt;/security&gt;
</programlisting></informalexample>

<para>Each &lt;pattern&gt; is a regular expression.</para>

<example role="live-example"><title>Allow classes that start with org.openlaszlo</title><programlisting>
&lt;security&gt;
    &lt;allow&gt;
        &lt;pattern&gt;^org\.openlaszlo&lt;/pattern&gt;
    &lt;/allow&gt;
&lt;/security&gt;
</programlisting></example>

<para>A javarpc object who's class is not declared in a security tag will result in
a load error.</para>


<para/></section><section><title>Type Mapping</title>

<para>This section describes how types are mapped from JavaScript function stub
parameters to Java method parameter and from Java return type to JavaScript
return type.</para>

<para/><section><title>Type mapping of parameters from JavaScript to Java</title>

<para>
<informaltable><tgroup cols="2"><thead><row><entry>JavaScript data type</entry><entry>Parameter types expected by java method</entry></row></thead><tbody><row><entry>Number (int)</entry><entry>int</entry></row><row><entry>Number (double)*</entry><entry>double</entry></row><row><entry>lz.rpc.DoubleWrapper</entry><entry>double</entry></row><row><entry>Boolean</entry><entry>boolean</entry></row><row><entry>Array</entry><entry>Vector</entry></row><row><entry>Object</entry><entry>Hashtable</entry></row></tbody></tgroup></informaltable>
</para>

<para>* Any floating point number with a zero decimal value is considered to be an
integer, i.e., 1.0 is really 1. Use lz.rpc.DoubleWrapper to ensure a number is
considered a double. For example:</para>

<informalexample role="live-example"><programlisting>
    // assume myrpc is a javarpc object and myrpc.proxy.myMethod is a function
    // that expects a single double as a parameter
    var mydouble = new lz.rpc.DoubleWrapper(1.0);
    myrpc.proxy.myMethod([ mydouble ], new LzDelegate(...));
</programlisting></informalexample>

<para>lz.rpc can be found in <literal>$LPS_HOME/lps/components/rpc/library/rpc.js</literal>.</para>

<example role="live-example">
   <title>Passing different parameter types</title>
   <programlisting language="lzx">
   <textobject><textdata fileref="programs/rpc-javarpc-$8.lzx"/></textobject> 
   </programlisting>
</example>

<para>The java source code used by the previous example can be found in
<literal>$LPS_HOME/WEB-INF/classes/examples</literal> and looks like:</para>

<informalexample role="live-example"><programlisting>
package examples;

import java.util.Vector;
import java.util.Hashtable;

public class TypesExample {

    public static String passInteger(int i) {
        return "got integer parameter: " + i;
    }

    public static String passDouble(double d) {
        return "got double parameter: " + d;
    }

    public static String passBoolean(boolean b) {
        return "got boolean parameter: " + b;
    }

    public static String passClientArray(Vector v) {
        return "got vector parameter: " + v;
    }

    public static String passClientObject(Hashtable t) {
        return "got hashtable parameter: " + t;
    }

}
</programlisting></informalexample>



<para/></section><section><title>Type mapping of return types from Java to JavaScript</title>

<para>
<informaltable><tgroup cols="2"><thead><row><entry>Server-side Java method return type</entry><entry>Client-side JavaScript function stub return type</entry></row></thead><tbody><row><entry>int/java.lang.Integer</entry><entry>Number+</entry></row><row><entry>short/java.lang.Short</entry><entry>Number+</entry></row><row><entry>long/java.lang.Long</entry><entry>Number+</entry></row><row><entry>float/java.lang.Float</entry><entry>Number+</entry></row><row><entry>double/java.lang.Double</entry><entry>Number+</entry></row><row><entry>byte/java.lang.Byte</entry><entry>Number+</entry></row><row><entry>boolean/java.lang.Boolean</entry><entry>Boolean</entry></row><row><entry>char/java.lang.Character</entry><entry>String</entry></row><row><entry>java.lang.String</entry><entry>String</entry></row><row><entry>"Array"/java.util.List*</entry><entry>Array</entry></row><row><entry>java.util.Map/java.lang.Object*</entry><entry>Object</entry></row></tbody></tgroup></informaltable>
</para>

<para><programlisting>
+ From "JavaScript The Definitive Guide" - O'Reilly. 

In JavaScript all numbers are floating-point numbers.

JavaScript uses the standard 8 byte IEEE floating-point numeric format, which
means the range is from:

+/- 1.7976931348623157x10^308 - very large, and +/- 5x10^-324 - very small.

As JavaScript uses floating-point numbers the accuracy is only assured for
integers between: -9,007,199,254,740,992 (-2^53) and 9,007,199,254,740,992
(2^53)
</programlisting></para>

<para><programlisting>* User-defined objects returned only contain public members. Also, the
object isn't saved anywhere in the server.</programlisting></para>

<example role="live-example">
   <title>Java to JavaScript</title>
   <programlisting language="lzx">
   <textobject><textdata fileref="programs/rpc-javarpc-$10.lzx"/></textobject> 
   </programlisting>
</example>

<para>The Java source code used by the previous example looks like:</para>

<informalexample role="live-example"><programlisting>
package examples;

import java.util.List;
import java.util.Vector;
import java.util.Map;
import java.util.HashMap;

public class ReturnTypeExample {

    public static int returnInteger() {
        return 1;
    }

    public static Integer returnIntegerObject() {
        return new Integer(2);
    }

    public static short returnShort() {
        return 3;
    }

    public static Short returnShortObject() {
        return new Short((short)4);
    }

    public static long returnLong() {
        return 5;
    }

    public static Long returnLongObject() {
        return new Long(6);
    }

    public static float returnFloat() {
        return 7;
    }

    public static Float returnFloatObject() {
        return new Float(8);
    }

    public static double returnDouble() {
        return 3.14159;
    }

    public static Double returnDoubleObject() {
        return new Double(3.14159);
    }

    public static byte returnByte() {
        return (byte)11;
    }

    public static Byte returnByteObject() {
        return new Byte((byte)12);
    }

    public static boolean returnBoolean() {
        return true;
    }

    public static Boolean returnBooleanObject() {
        return new Boolean(false);
    }

    public static char returnCharacter() {
        return 'a';
    }

    public static Character returnCharacterObject() {
        return new Character('b');
    }

    public static String returnString() {
        return "returing a string";
    }

    public static Coordinate returnCoordinateObject() {
        return new Coordinate(4,2);
    }

    public static int[] returnIntegerArray() {
        int[] intarr = { 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 };
        return intarr;
    }

    public static String[] returnStringArray() {
        String[] strarr = { "one", "two", "three", "four", "five" };
        return strarr;
    }

    public static Coordinate[] returnCoordinateObjectArray() {
        Coordinate[] coarr =  { new Coordinate(1,1), 
                                new Coordinate(2,2),
                                new Coordinate(3,3),
                                new Coordinate(4,4),
                                new Coordinate(5,5) };
        return coarr;
    }

    public static List returnIntegerList() {
        List list = new Vector();
        list.add(new Integer(1));
        list.add(new Integer(2));
        list.add(new Integer(3));
        list.add(new Integer(4));
        list.add(new Integer(5));
        return list;
    }

    public static Map returnIntegerMap() {
        Map map = new HashMap();
        map.put("one", new Integer(1));
        map.put("two", new Integer(2));
        map.put("three", new Integer(3));
        map.put("four", new Integer(4));
        map.put("five", new Integer(5));
        return map;
    }

    public static List returnCoordinateObjectList() {
        List list = new Vector();
        list.add(new Coordinate(1,1));
        list.add(new Coordinate(2,2));
        list.add(new Coordinate(3,3));
        list.add(new Coordinate(4,4));
        list.add(new Coordinate(5,5));
        return list;
    }

    public static Map returnCoordinateObjectMap() {
        Map map = new HashMap();
        map.put("one", new Coordinate(1,1));
        map.put("two", new Coordinate(2,3));
        map.put("three", new Coordinate(5,8));
        map.put("four", new Coordinate(13,21));
        map.put("five", new Coordinate(34,55));
        return map;
    }

    static public class Coordinate {
        public int x;
        public int y;

        public Coordinate(int x, int y) {
            this.x = x;
            this.y = y;
        }

        public String toString() {
            return "x: " + this.x + ", y: " + this.y;
        }
    }
}
</programlisting></informalexample>

<para/></section></section></chapter>
