<chapter id="rpc-xmlrpc">
<title condition="proxied">XML-RPC</title>
<!-- remove commented out sample code that was ignored by the build. IORIO 20 nov 2007 -->
<!-- change link rpc per LPP-4923, IORIO 17 oct 2007 -->
<para>XML-RPC is simple spec that describes how to invoke a remote operation using
XML over HTTP.  OpenLaszlo XML-RPC is part of <xref linkend="rpc" endterm="rpcshort" />, and shares many of the 
same APIs and concepts. OpenLaszlo RPC includes <xref linkend="rpc-soap" endterm="rpc-soapshort" /> and 
<xref linkend="rpc-javarpc" endterm="rpc-javashort" />. For more information on XML-RPC,
go to <ulink url="http://www.xmlrpc.com/">XML-RPC.com</ulink></para>

<para/><section><title>&lt;xmlrpc&gt;</title>

<para>The &lt;xmlrpc&gt; element creates a client-side representation of an XML-RPC
service. The service attribute is required and must be an URL.</para>

<example role="live-example"><title>SOAP</title><programlisting>
&lt;xmlrpc service="..."
      autoload="[true|false]"
      secure="[true|false]"
      secureport="..." &gt;
</programlisting></example>




<para/><section><title>Attributes</title>

<para><indexterm significance="preferred"><primary>service</primary></indexterm><glossterm>service</glossterm>: (String) URL of where service is located. This attribute
is required.</para>

<para><indexterm significance="preferred"><primary>autoload</primary></indexterm><glossterm>autoload</glossterm>: (Boolean) if true, calls to load client proxy during
init stage. If false, the proxy must be loaded using the load() method. See the
proxy section in the RPC chapter for details. <emphasis role="b">Default is true.</emphasis></para>

<para><indexterm significance="preferred"><primary>secure</primary></indexterm><glossterm>secure</glossterm>: (Boolean) if true, creates a secure HTTPS connection
between the client and the OpenLaszlo Server. Also see secureport below. <emphasis role="b">Default is
false.</emphasis></para>

<para><indexterm significance="preferred"><primary>secureport</primary></indexterm><glossterm>secureport</glossterm>: (Number) valid only when secure attribute is set to
true. The secure port to use. There is no client-side default. Most servers use
port 443 as the default HTTPS port.</para>


<para/></section><section><title>Read-only properties</title>

<para><indexterm significance="preferred"><primary>proxy</primary></indexterm><glossterm>proxy</glossterm>: (Object) unlike other RPC services, proxy functions are
created based on declared remotecall elements. Because there is no XML-RPC
service description, each function stub in the proxy is created by remotecall
elements declared by the developer. In other RPC services, declared remotecalls
refer to proxy function stubs that exist after load.</para>

<para/></section><section><title>Methods</title>

<para/><section id="rpc-xmlrpc.load"><title>load()</title>

<para>Load() is responsible for setting up the proxy property. The proxy will have
function stubs based on remotecalls declared in the body of the &lt;xmlrpc&gt;
element. This method is automatically invoked if autoload is true. When the call
returns, an onload event is sent.</para>

<para/></section><section><title>unload()</title>

<para>This method unloads the proxy from the RPC object and sets it to null. When
the call returns, an onunload event is sent.</para>

<para/></section></section></section><section><title>Using remotecall to creating function stubs</title>

<para>Most  OpenLaszlo RPC objects like JavaRPC and SOAP will set function stubs in the
proxy property during load based on methods described by a class (for JavaRPC)
or on a service description (using a WSDL in SOAP). Remotecall declarations
refer to these function stubs and any remotecalls not pointing to a function
stub that doesn't exist will generate an error or warning. In &lt;xmlrpc&gt;,
function stubs are create based on remotecall declarations. Note that XML-RPC
use dot notation for their operation names. Because that will conflict with the
view system's notation, it's suggested that remotecalls be explicitly named.</para>

<example role="live-example">
   <title>Creating a function stub</title>
   <programlisting language="lzx">
   <textobject><textdata fileref="programs/rpc-xmlrpc-$2.lzx"/></textobject> 
   </programlisting>
</example>

<para/></section></chapter>
